Gliomas, the most common brain tumor, are currently classified as astrocytic, ependymal, oligodendroglial and choroid plexus tumors. Among astrocytic tumors, glioblastoma (World Health Organization grade IV [1]) is the most lethal primary malignant brain tumor. Although considerable progress has been made in its treatment, the clinical prognosis associated with this tumor remains poor.
Histone deacetylases (HDACs) have recently become recognized as a promising target for cancer therapy, including for the treatment of glioblastomas [2]. Together with histone acetyltransferases (HATs), HDACs are responsible for chromatin packaging, which influences the transcription process. In general, increased levels of acetylation (high HAT levels) are associated with increased transcriptional activity, whereas decreased acetylation levels (high HDAC levels) are associated with repression of transcription (reviewed in [3]). HDACs are classified into 4 major categories based on their homology to yeast HDACs, including structure and cellular localization (Figure 1). Class I and class II HDAC proteins share a common enzymatic mechanism that is the Zn-catalyzed hydrolysis of the acetyl-lysine amide bond. Human class I HDACs includes HDAC1, -2, -3, and -8, which are enzymes similar to the yeast transcriptional regulator Rpd3, generally localized to the nucleus [4,5]. These enzymes are ubiquitously expressed (with the exception of HDAC8, which has higher expression levels in the liver) and seems to function as a complex with other proteins [6]. HDAC1 and -2 only show activity within a protein complex, which consists of proteins necessary for modulating their deacetylase activity and DNA binding, and the recruitment of HDACs to gene promoters [7]. Wilson AJ et al. [8] have suggested that multiple class I HDAC members are also involved in repressing p21 and that the growth inhibitory and apoptotic effects induced by HDAC inhibitors are probably mediated through the inhibition of multiple HDACs.
